>>Who were the ancient
peoples of the world?
And what did they know?
Egyptology tells us
that the pyramids
were built around 2500 BC.
Is there evidence
that the pyramids
could be much, much older?
Has traditional science
been able to explain
why the pyramids
were built, or is it
a puzzle yet to be decoded?
At the geodesic
center of the world,
at the mouth of the
Nile delta, there
are pyramids built by an
early civilization clustering
at six distinct sites.
One pyramid is up a mountain.
It can be seen from space.
Curiously, the inside
is open to the air.
What was its function?
Most people are familiar with
the Giza Plateau and the Sphinx
but are not aware of their
connection to the other sites.
The sites run parallel to the
fertile band along the Nile.
Some sites are unknown, isolated
in the middle of the desert.
Other sites are known, but
are only partially excavated.
The monumental
nature of the sites
is hypnotic and stimulates
our wonder and curiosity.
All the sites show evidence
of sophisticated engineering,
advanced technology, and
monumental architecture.
Could the ancients have
had an understanding
of a superior science?
Is it conceivable that
there's a correlation
between the sky and the ground?
Why do we understand so
little about the Egyptians.
We are told their
technology was primitive.
Yet the temple walls
show the ancients
making precise calculations.
There is plenty of evidence
that paints a fuller picture.
Let's go and see for ourselves.
>>So here we are on
location at Abu Rowash,
which is a fascinating site
in that it's up a mountain.
>>This is a pyramid like
no other, open to the air.
>>This site really
debunks the theory
of pulling stones with
rope to get them up
on top of a pyramid, in that
the stone would have to come up
a mountain before it
went up a pyramid.
This site is largely
isolated and abandoned,
and many people don't
even know it's here.
There's no booth.
There's no guard.
There's nobody up here.
And I think it's meant
to be largely forgotten
because it really comes
head to head with the theory
about the way the
pyramids were built.
When you look
around the site, you
see evidence of small
stones that are newer,
medium stones, and then
the ancient large stones.
>>At Abu Rowash, we can see
evidence of machine tool marks.
We know the granite came
from distant quarries.
The polished, concave
slabs of stone
could not possibly have
been made with chisels.
This is not the only
example of machine tooling.
>>We're now going to
go inside the pyramid.
We're walking along this ledge.
And what we'll see is
there's a passageway here
that goes down into
the pyramid, even
though it's open and exposed.
So let's go down.
If you stand here, all
the way through this area,
the stone seems to be
blackened, and it's
evidence of high
heat of some kind.
I tend to think this was going
on during the ancient times,
but it's still very curious.
There's a pit here, and the
stone's obviously broken.
And I think that they
were heating something.
This is the northern point
of the Band of Peace.
It's the top pyramid in a
series of 22 pyramids that
go from north to south.
So we are now north
of the Giza Plateau.
>>As you can see on this
map of the Band of Peace,
all these sites trace the
shape of the River Nile.
A new theory suggests that
the Nile once flowed right
in front of the pyramids, and
the causeways of all the sites
touched the river itself.
Considering that the Nile
is the lifeblood of Egypt,
just as rivers all
around the world
are vital to the
cultures living by them,
it seems obvious that
important, sacred structures
would be built
directly on the river,
not eight miles away from it.
How long would it take this
river to migrate eight miles?
Looking at geological
time provides yet
another clue to finding out when
these magnificent structures
may have been built.
>>This probably was a seabed,
and that the mouth of the Nile
started here, and
that moved along
in front of all these pyramids.
One of the features of each
of the sites in this area
is that you can see the pyramids
of next site from the original.
>>From here, the volume
of the Great Pyramid
and the second
pyramid look the same.
When we get to the
next site, we see
the volumes are
obviously different.
It's hard not to be amazed
by the pyramids of the Giza
Plateau.
The Great Pyramid
covers 13 acres.
It was constructed
of 2.3 million stones
weighing up to 200 tons each.
>>They must have had a
level of engineering science
that-- it was unbelievable--
compared to what we have now.
>>Indeed, they managed a have
an order of which they based
on this so-called cosmic order,
which lasted for 3,000 years.
No other civilization
has done this.
>>Why is ancient Egypt
still so mysterious to us?
Are we looking in
the wrong place?
Or are we looking
in the wrong way?
>>We look at everything through
our sociocultural context,
and so it's very difficult
for us to look through that
and see another possibility
for how life could have been.
And we also have to
be willing to depart
from our own traditional
ways of looking at things.
That's what's really stopping
us from understanding
the ancients.
>>We may need to reconsider
what we've been told
and what we think we've seen.
For example, instead of
thinking that the Egyptians put
the causeway at an angle because
the Sphinx was in the way,
we could consider
another reason.
At summer solstice, the sun
rises along the causeway
in front of the Great Pyramid
and moves across the sky,
setting between the second
and the Great Pyramid,
making it hotter in summer.
In the winter, the sun rises
in line with the grand causeway
by the second pyramid, and sets
between the second and third
pyramids, making a
short trajectory,
resulting in cooler weather.
It appears that the
causeways are deliberately
pointing towards the rising
sun on the summer and winter
solstices.
Orthodox Egyptologists insist
that the pyramid were tombs.
>>Of all of the wild theories
floating around the pyramids,
the actual wildest
is the one that's
accepted without question
by all Egyptologists, which
is that the pyramids
served as tombs.
>>All of those concepts about
it being a tomb are nonsense.
>>Of all of the theories for
which there is zero evidence,
that one has zero
squared evidence.
>>In fact, I don't even
think there's good evidence
that it ever was a tomb
for any pharaoh whatsoever.
>>I mean, it's obvious.
We don't find mummies
in the pyramids.
>>There's no question you can
bring up that isn't debatable.
The Egyptians themselves,
in at least one stone tablet
and one papyrus, tell the
story that ancient Egypt
is much, much older than the
Egyptologists think it is.
>>Where the Great
Pyramid sits, I believe,
is on a much more ancient site.
Under the Great
Pyramid to this day
is the descending passage
in the subterranean chamber.
I think there's
very good evidence
that that was carved
out in what we
would call pre-dynastic times.
That goes back to a
very ancient date.
Based on the hieroglyphics
that we have,
the second pyramid
was, in many ways,
regarded as the primary
pyramid on the Giza Plateau.
Actually, from many angles
on the Giza Plateau,
the second pyramid is dominant.
The structure underneath
it, or the base of it,
was older than even
the Great Pyramid.
There was a
platform-type structure
where the second pyramid is now.
>>You can see from the
platform that it's larger
than the pyramid,
suggesting there was once
something else there.
>>Around the base is a ring
of granite, red granite.
And, at least from what
I've seen in Egypt,
this is something that was
often used around the bases
or on structures when
they were renewing them,
they were refurbishing
them, they were taking older
structures, re-energizing
them, rebuilding them.
>>It's demonstrable, in
that the second pyramid
is very definitely built in at
least two stages, the third,
built in two or more stages.
I mean, we really don't, at
the moment, have anything to,
even provisionally,
to date them with.
With the Sphinx, we do.
>>Looking at the weathering
on the Sphinx and the Sphinx
enclosure, that weathering
was clearly formed by runoff
from rain from precipitation.
>>We have the severe
weathering, which
99% of the geologists of the
world who've heard our evidence
concur that it is indeed
water weathering and
precipitation-induced.
So it has to have been
done by heavy rainfalls
in the distant past.
And the question then is
how distant was that past.
>>That runoff is coming
from up on the plateau.
Follow up the plateau
northwest of the Sphinx,
you ultimately hit
the Great Pyramid.
The natural topography
is the water
would run down the back
of the Sphinx enclosure.
And that's where
you see the greatest
amount of water
precipitation weathering.
To have that surface
hydrology, you
need to have the plateau
relatively intact.
Now, if you look
currently, there's
a big quarry interrupting
the water flow.
So we know that
the water flow that
was causing that weathering
had to occur before that quarry
existed.
That quarry is well-known
Egyptologically by inscriptions
because that was
a quarry that was
used when the Great
Pyramid was built.
So that means that the Sphinx
must have been carved earlier.
The water was still
running off, running down
the back of the enclosure
wall, and causing
that weathering
before that quarry
was a quarry, which means
that occurs before the Great
Pyramid was built.
Basically, we have
right there disrupted
the traditional chronology.
>>Even Egyptologists agree
that the Giza Plateau
has a unified ground plan.
How does the Great
Pyramid display
evidence of this correlation?
>>I do think when it was what
we would call partially built,
it was used as an
astronomical observatory.
The grand gallery perfectly
aligned north-south opening
to the southern
sky would have made
a wonderful observational
tube, essentially,
looking up into the sky.
>>We have shafts pointing
to certain stars.
Orion's belt series.
We know the stars because
they're mentioned in texts.
We therefore can use precession
to place the stars back
in alignment with
these monuments,
in this case, the
pyramids, for example.
>>The Great Pyramid
stands exactly
at the center of the largest
land mass on the planet.
Yet we had no idea of the
position of continents
until 600 years ago.
How could they have known?
>>I've shown that
Giza, if interpreted
as being Orion's belt
counterpart, then
the layout of the
three pyramids,
as they are at the
ground meridian,
would fit a celestial meridian
of these stars at 10,500 BC,
that they reached the
very lowest point in their
up and down move.
Looking east, you had
the Sphinx looking
at the constellation of Leo.
So you have two major
monuments, on the same site,
looking at constellations
that are representative
of these features on
the ground in this sky.
We have evidence
that they did it.
And the alignments were there.
Now, could the pyramid
builders have been aware
of these alignments?
Well, why not?
>>With this evidence,
it would seem
that it's time to rethink
what we've been told.
>>Here we are at Abu Garab.
You can see that there's
no road, no ticket
booth, no nothing.
This is a very isolated area.
And we're going to walk
through a mango grove.
If you were to get
on a camel and ride
south from Giza Plateau, you'd
come up over this sand dune
and see these other pyramids.
So as we approach up here,
you see a pile of rubble.
But really what
it is is the base
of the largest obelisk
that ever was in Egypt.
Well, here we come up to the
platform of the Crystal Altar.
You can see that
it's made of quartz,
if you look up close here.
These little bits of crystal
are coming right off it.
And then, we have a laser-cut
six-foot circle in the middle,
and then these points, these
huge slabs each pointing
to the four cardinal
directions, made out
of single, solid
pieces of quartz.
So here we have
some stone basins
that were found by Sir Walter
Emery years and years ago.
And the Department
of Antiquities
lined all these up with the
idea of maybe bringing them
to the museum.
And they really didn't know what
to call them or what they were.
So they just decided
to leave them here,
and they've been
here ever since.
But if you look at
the features on these,
they're actually made
out of quartz crystal.
We'll look up close
at some of the places,
but when there's little
fragments that break off,
it's actually a hunk of quartz.
And there are these
little holes inside,
and they say that they
were for animal sacrifices,
and the blood
would drop through.
I don't know.
I really don't think
that's what happened.
No one has ever come up with
a theory that satisfies me
about what they're for.
>>Is there anyone who
knows more about this area?
Hakim Awyan is an
indigenous wisdom-keeper
who was born in the
village of Abusir.
He trained in Europe
as an archaeologist.
Hakim lived his whole
life in the area
known as the Band of Peace.
The Giza Plateau
was his front yard.
>>1936, '37, the Sphinx
then was covered with sand
up to the neck.
And there was my playing yard.
There are tunnels.
I used to walk in these tunnels.
In water, I used to crawl
sometimes, because it's narrow.
At Abu Garab, we have a
crystal altar, a round disk
in the middle of four,
a symbol of hotep.
And the word hotep
means peace and food.
This round disk,
it's a lid on a shaft
about 180 feet deep, to
the level of the ocean.
And that is still
running water in there,
and you can feel it
while you're in the area.
These instruments were not found
in a line like you see today,
the nine of them.
But they're found
around the area,
and there are still
some more to be found.
And then we have oldest
obelisk located in Egypt.
Next to the altar,
what's left of the what
you call hieroglyph writing,
that's Sufi writing,
at the obelisk, and
the disk of the sun,
and words saying the
heart of the sun.
>>Arriving at Abusir, we can
imagine the ancient priests
and priestesses who trained
as high-level initiates here.
Just as we have monks,
nuns, and priests nowadays,
the ancients trained
initiates in ritual practices
that served the highest
good of mankind.
>>Here we are at Abusir.
And it's very obvious you
can see the old river bed.
And you can see the
pyramids of Saqqara
and the pyramids
of Giza from here.
But more importantly, you
can see the old causeway,
and you can imagine that boats
used to come along the river.
And then the
high-level initiates
would just step off the boat
and walk up the grand causeway
and through the pillars
into the temple, which
is in front of the main pyramid.
>>Spiritual connections
would nourish the initiates,
instilling a sense
of peace and purpose.
These elegant columns are
carved from solid granite.
>>There's something about these
black floors that you just
imagine them being polished,
and the beauty in here.
>>Similarly, you can see
a beautiful black floor
in the temple to the east
of the Great Pyramid.
The rituals of ancient Egyptians
were dictated by the stars.
For example, the ancients
tracked the movement
of the most prominent star
in the night sky, Sirius.
Through watching night after
night, season after season,
they realized that this star
would drop below the horizon
and remain out of sight
for 70 days each year.
Its return was awaited
with anticipation
because it coincided with
the flooding of the Nile.
>>Now what happens
during the 70 days?
Well, if you
observe the sky, you
will notice that the sun
reaches a certain point
in its apparent cycle
along the zodiac.
It's somewhere above Orion at
the beginning of the 70 days.
And it drifts approximately
a degree every day
towards the
constellation of Leo.
So the 70 days are
bracketed by Leo and a point
somewhere above Orion.
That point is where
the Pleiades are.
In the sky, it's very clear.
I mean, we know what
happens in those 70 days.
Now, assuming on the ground that
the three stars are represented
by the three pyramids of
Giza and that the temple
of Heliopolis represents
the constellation of Leo,
then you have another feature.
You have the Nile that
separates them both.
Similarly in the sky, the sun
at the beginning of the 70 days
is about to cross the Milky
Way and head towards Leo.
So if you take the three
stars of Orion's belt
as being the three pyramids,
then you have a scale.
You know the distance,
and therefore you
know the static scale
that you're talking about.
And if you use that scale,
you work on the same scale,
then the position of
Abusir fits the Pleiades.
And surprisingly, there are
five, six pyramids there,
and there are six or
seven stars there,
and they seem to
be in a cluster.
And indeed, the sun's path
is just below the Pleiades.
It's not through them.
Just below them.
And odd enough, we find
the sun temples just
below the Abusir pyramids.
So you've got sun
temple to sun temple.
I now call it sun stations.
It looks like these were the
stations that on the ground,
the Sol king performed
these 70 days' rituals,
a bit like the
stations of the cross.
So you can see them in a much
archaic and grandiose way.
The king went along
to these stations,
if you like, to perform
his rituals, his passion.
>>Here we are at Saqqara.
This is the famous
step pyramid of Djoser.
Djoser is a title to the
king of the Third Dynasty,
2900 BC, roughly, say the books.
The step pyramid is located in
a big courtyard much, much older
than the pyramid itself.
And you can compare yourself.
With the same eye, you
look at the pyramid
and you look at the wall,
you can see the difference.
>>These chunks of
stone in front of Hakim
are quartz crystal
characteristic of the area.
>>If we go back to
the ceiling here,
then it reflects the
crystal tile on the ground.
This is what's left of it.
This has been quarried
by the natives
in the area in the 17th century,
>>We see the remains of a quartz
floor at Giza in the temple
to the east of the
second pyramid.
>>Now I'm pointing
the Djed Pillar,
which is symbolizing one of
the ancient gods, Osiris.
And djed is the
word we still use
to address the older people.
My grandmother and
grandfather, djed.
It goes back to
the story of Osiris
and his brother
Seth, the bad guy,
who put Osiris in a coffin,
threw him in the ocean.
The ocean took him place,
Phoenicia, Lebanon today.
And there as the
cedar tree grows,
and the roots of the cedar
tree captured his coffin.
Osiris has been found by
his beloved sister, Isis.
She cry.
As she touched his body, and
they lived together again
for a short while,
short enough to make
a baby with the name of Horus.
>>The story of Isis,
Osiris, and Horus
is fundamental to
Egyptian cosmology.
Isis is connected
to the star Sirius,
and Osiris is connected to
the constellation of Orion.
Horus is their prodigal son.
>>I'm going to
take you now to see
that hospital, the
healing with sound.
>>Stories about ancient
healing techniques
were passed down from generation
to generation by the elders.
Hakim explains how
sound played a part
in diagnosing and
healing patients.
>>That line of construction
you see like three chambers,
it's what's left of the
House of the Spirit,
and it's a healing
system with sound.
It's a medical
investigation table.
And the patient have
the right to use
either side of the stairs, one
on the right, one on the left.
So he'd have to
follow, or she'd have
to follow her own antenna
to climb up there and choose
the point where she stand,
because each point is
connected to a check chamber.
We have 22 of them,
11 on each side.
No ceiling.
And when you go inside,
you can see a niche
where the physician put
his head in the niche
to see what's the matter
with his patient laying
on this table.
And that works with the sound.
And the sound, the source,
is the running water
in a tunnel underneath here.
There is a big map of
tunnels underneath here.
>>Let's consider that
the pyramid sites
along the Band of Peace
are sophisticated, harmonic
structures not only mirroring
positions of the stars,
but designed to
replicate harmonic
cavities of the human body.
It seems that the
chambers in the pyramids
are harmonically tuned
to a specific frequency
or musical tone.
Sound healing
techniques were used
to restore the patient's body
to the correct harmonic within.
This is the view of Abusir
to the north of Saqqara.
And here is the view of
Dashour to the south.
>>Here we are on location
at the Bent Pyramid.
What you'll notice here
is that the construction
has two angles.
>>Traditional
Egyptologists will tell you
that the Egyptians were
practicing building pyramids.
And they started
building at one angle,
then changed their
minds partway through.
This is the kind of
thinking that paints
the ancient Egyptians as
infantile and misguided.
But is there another
way of looking at it?
>>We call these
constructions at that area
in Dashour related to
king called Sneferu.
>>At Dashour, there
are three pyramids
with three burial chambers
in each, nine in total.
Traditional Egyptology tells
us that the entire site
was built by Sneferu.
If the established story
that the pyramids are tombs
is correct, why would
Sneferu have needed so many?
>>Sneferu would have had
nine different possibilities
and options for where he
would have been buried,
which again is illogical.
So this comes back to the
fact that understanding
the Egyptians in terms
of traditional Egyptology
means that they were
misguided and illogical.
I don't think this was the case.
>>Now, when you come to the
word Sneferu, Sn means double,
nefer is harmony.
So it's double harmony.
It's not a name of
a person, but it's
the energy we get from
this construction.
>>Let's consider that
the pyramid sites
along the Band of Peace
are sophisticated, harmonic
structures.
[HUMMING]
>>It seems that the
chambers in the pyramids
were harmonically tuned
to different frequencies
or musical tones.
>>The Bent Pyramid,
it has two chambers
for two different sounds.
>>Each chamber in
each pyramid, then,
could be exemplifying
sound technology
with distinct tones
creating huge fields
of harmonic resonance.
At Dashour, we have the Red
Pyramid and the Black Pyramid.
The Bent Pyramid is covered
in white Tura limestone.
So we have red,
white, and black.
Maybe this is a clue to
the Giza pyramids also
having distinct
colors in the past.
It would seem that the
Great Pyramid would
have been shimmering white
with its casing stones.
The second pyramid
still glimmers red.
And the third pyramid has
the remnants of black stones.
This is the old river bed where
the Nile flowed in times past.
Here is the black pyramid.
Egyptologists say the pyramid
builders were experimenting,
and they miscalculated, so
the pyramid broke apart.
Could there be a
different explanation?
Another pyramid with
similar construction
100 kilometers south
of the Band of Peace
is known as the Meidum Pyramid.
>>Today when you walk
around Meidum Pyramid,
you will find out
that on the ground
is a coat of
black-colored flint.
And the evidence is this.
When you pick up
one of these flints,
you see it's black at
the top and the bottom
is a different color.
And there is a catastrophe
happened over there.
I want you to look
at the ground.
You can see a coat
of smoke affects
the flints on the ground.
>>Meidum is not
the only place that
looks as though there
was an explosion.
Look at this giant crack in the
solid stone of the Red Pyramid.
It would have taken a huge
force to crack the solid rock.
There is a crack in the
subterranean chamber
in the Great Pyramid.
And there is another one
in the Grand Gallery.
There are weird chemical
burns in the Red Pyramid.
What could have caused these?
Old photos of the king's
chamber in the Great Pyramid
show the stone as black.
The room was cleaned
and restored,
and now we can see the
walls are pink granite.
The granite sarcophagus
has a broken corner,
and the wall next to
it has a giant crack.
What kind of force
could have caused this?
Is the Department of
Antiquities erasing evidence
under the guise of restoration?
Where did we get the
history of Egypt?
Herodotus was a Greek historian
in the 5th century BC.
He wrote from his perspective
with help from local people,
and we have been
repeating it ever since.
>>I said fake stories.
I want you to know yourself,
to wake up, to wake the senses
and look carefully what
you are looking at.
What have you seen
of the pyramids.
That's what's left of it.
Being abused.
People quarry stones from there.
Anybody can go
and pick up stones
to build a church,
mosque, house, palace.
It's not taken good care of
by our minister of culture
and antiquities department.
I have to say this.
>>The story leaves many
questions unanswered.
Maybe it is time we
used the evidence
to reconsider what
we've been told.
We need to look with fresh
eyes and use a different time
frame to reconstruct the
story of ancient Egypt.